preface:
I started this at 8:30 hopes are high and i have a good compass on how tyo complete this poroject hopefully i can peice together part from other projects to complete this
I hope to docuement not only y rambles but my thinking as claude or you can understand my thinking and approach
I want to not only leave all the data, collection processing and usage aswell as teaching the use and setup
I have created a version with chatgpt using a GPT API key which you will have to attach
I have also added some instruction to push this to production using docker
I have also added a test file which can be used in terminal etc
requrirements.txt has all the python libaries needed
you will need python and a OPENAI API key

DATA COLLECTION:

In this i have broken my code in to different sections i will explain the steps and my thinking here:

1. Ok we need all the text from savemyexams, i don't have premuim account so this might be difficult. Initally i beleive they have an IP based way of blocking IP's but this was wrong i believe it has something to do with tocken caching, This is great there might be some IP problems for too many requrests as they might block web scrappers but if that is an issue we can add some network changes and swap IPs.
Each fetch will be a unique request so we will be in the clear.
2. We will also fetch some PMT notes etc.
3. any others sources i will think of later.
4. 


hyperlinks.py
This will simply just fetch all the notes to the aqa physics spec so that we can then scrape the raw text in the next file
this gives a raw vesion of all the hyperlinks and a filtereed one that we wil use


fetch_text.py
all right this basically grab all the relivent text saves the topic tittle as well as grabbing the link which is needed as it will be used by the bot to referance further resources in the future.
this will also sort them numerically as they come up in the spec this is will not be neededs as we will stick them all within the spec anyways which i will also add
turns out not alphebetical but who cares to be honest now let grab the spec and the text book and break them down before creating our vector database.


Grabtext.py
in this file i have just added some other sooruces such as the spec and the textbook which is also referanced which will also add some 3estra info i have just added the raw pdf which allows for no funny web searches


scratch that we will break down the text book into spec by spec by the titles and then the spec by titles save them acordingly before creating the vector double

right we have reached the point where we have all our data and ouyr chunks i think i will go on a walk and then we will set up langchain our vector db and then test before laying out the framework for deploying to a server