[TEXTBOOK: AQA A Level Physics (Year 1 and Year 2) Boost eBook Author(s): Nick England, Carol Davenport, Jeremy Pollard, Nicky Thomas | CHAPTER: 4 Mechanics and materials | SECTION: 4.5 Newton’s laws of motion | PRINTED_PAGES: 72-74]

4 Mechanics and materials
Terminal speed
When any object falls through a fluid such as air it will experience a viscous drag.
As the object falls faster and faster the drag force increases. Eventually the drag force increases to a value where it is equal to the weight of the object and the body continues to fall at a steady speed. We call this the terminal speed of the object (Figure 4.22).
Acceleration: drag < mg
Terminal speed: drag = mg
Figure 4.22 Terminal speed
At the terminal speed:
viscous drag (air resistance) = weight of the object = mg
Figure 4.23 shows how the velocity of an object will increase with time as it falls through a viscous fluid. The acceleration starts with a value of g but falls to zero when the terminal speed is reached.
Terminal speed
Velocity of falling sphere
Time
Figure 4.23 Terminal speed graph
Newton’s first law of motion
Newton’s first law of motion states that:
A body remains at rest or in a state of uniform motion unless acted on by a resultant force.
4 Mechanics and materials
At rest
Someone sitting on a stool may be at rest but they are acted on by two forces — their weight and the reaction of the stool. It is because these two forces are balanced and there is no resultant force that they stay still — i.e. at rest.
Uniform motion
This means no change of velocity; since velocity is a vector, this means at a steady speed in a straight line. As a skydiver falls out of a plane their speed increases — their weight is bigger than the drag — so there is a net force and Newton’s first law does not apply. However, as the drag increases the two forces on them become equal and the skydiver falls with a constant velocity — a state of uniform motion.
Newton’s second law of motion
You need a force to change the motion of a body. The bigger the net force the greater the acceleration. (Remember that force is a vector and the direction of the forces acting on a body need to be considered.)
Newton’s second law of motion suggests that:
●	acceleration is directly proportional to the accelerating force
●	acceleration is inversely proportional to the mass of the body being accelerated force = mass × acceleration
F = ma
The units for force are newtons (N), those for mass are kg and those for acceleration m s−2.
This law also gives us a good definition of the newton as a unit of force.
One newton is the force that will give a mass of 1 kilogram an acceleration of 1 m s−2.
Example
A 250 kg box is pulled along a smooth road (no frictional drag) using a force of 2000 N. What is the acceleration of the block?
Answer
Using F = ma:
a = F
m = 2000
250  = 8 m s−2
Now test yourself
13 At the start of a 100 m race the rear foot of a sprinter can exert a force of some 1150 N on the starting blocks and the front foot an additional 800 N. If the sprinter is a man of mass 83 kg what is his initial acceleration?
14 If a rocket has a mass of 50 000 kg and its motors exert a thrust of 550 000 N what is the initial vertical acceleration off the rocket? (g = 9.8 m s−2)
Answers on p. 217
Exam tip
Note that it is mass that is used in the equation, mass is measured in kg. Do not convert mass to a weight.
4 Mechanics and materials
Newton’s third law of motion
This states that:
If a force acts on one body, an equal and opposite force acts on another body.
or
Action and reaction are equal and opposite.
This law can be checked by fixing two spring-loaded trucks together on a linear air track. When the spring is released they both move off, showing that there is a force on both, with the acceleration of each truck depending on its mass.
The two forces mentioned in Newton’s third law are known as a
‘Newton pair’ (Figure 4.24).
Figure 4.24 A Newton pair
A Newton pair of forces has the following properties:
l The two forces act on two different bodies.
l Both forces are always of the same type (i.e. both gravitational, both electrostatic, etc.).
l The forces are equal in magnitude.
l The forces act in opposite directions.
A book on a table can be used to explain the idea of a Newton pair. In this example there are two Newton pairs:
l Gravitational forces — the pull of the Earth on the book and the pull of the book on the Earth.
l Contact forces — the push of the book on the table and the push of the table on the book.
Now test yourself
15 A car of mass 1000 kg pulls a caravan of mass 800 kg. The driving wheels of the car exert a force of
8000 N on the road. The total resistance to motion is 3000 N.
(a) What is the net accelerating force?
(b) What is the acceleration?
(c) What is the force of the car on the caravan?
Answer on p. 217
Exam tip
Notice that in each case if one of the forces of the pair is removed it makes the other one vanish.