LINK: https://www.savemyexams.com/a-level/physics/aqa/17/revision-notes/10-medical-physics/10-1-physics-of-the-eye/10-1-1-converging-and-diverging-lenses
HEADING: Converging & Diverging Lenses ( AQA A Level Physics ): Revision Note
====================================================================================================

( AQA A Level Physics ): Revision Note
Converging Lenses A lens is a piece of equipment that forms an image by refracting light There are two types of lenses: A convex, or converging lens A concave, or diverging lens In a converging lens, parallel rays of light are brought to a focus along the principal axis This point is called the focal point The Ray Diagram of a Converging Lens A converging lens brings parallel rays of light to a focus The distance from the centre of the lens to the focal point is called the focal length , f This length depends on how curved , or how thick , the lens is The more curved ( thicker ) the lens, the shorter the focal length The shorter the focal length, the more powerful the lens f is positive for a converging lens because it is in front of the lens The Different Shapes of Lenses with Long and Short Focal Lengths The focal length is shorter in a lens that is thicker and more curved. This makes for a more powerful lens Real & Virtual Images Images produced by lenses can be either real or virtual Real image Virtual image light converges towards a focal point light diverges away from a focal point always inverted always upright can be projected onto a screen cannot be projected onto a screen intersection of two solid lines intersection of two dashed lines (or a dashed and a solid line) example: image from a projector onto a screen example: image in a mirror Constructing Ray Diagrams When constructing ray diagrams of refractors, it is generally assumed that the lenses used are very thin This simplifies the situation by reducing the amount the incident rays of light refract As a result, the three main rules for constructing ray diagrams are as follows: 1. Rays passing through the principal axis will pass through the optical centre of the lens undeviated Converging Lens Ray Diagram Construction Rule 1 2. Rays that are parallel to the principal axis will be refracted and pass through the focal point f Converging Lens Ray Diagram Construction Rule 2 3. Rays passing through the focal point f will emerge parallel to the principal axis Converging Lens Ray Diagram Construction Rule 3 Image Formation by a Converging Lens Images formed by lenses can be described by their Nature: Real or virtual Orientation: Inverted or upright (compared to the object) Size: Magnified (larger), diminished (smaller), or the same size (compared to the object) Drawing ray diagrams of real images For an object placed at a distance greater than 2 focal lengths... A Converging Lens Ray Diagram for an Object Placed Further than 2f The image that forms will have the following properties: The image forms... between f and 2 f The nature of the image is... real The orientation of the image is... inverted The size of the image is... diminished For an object placed at a distance equal to 2 focal lengths... A Converging Lens Ray Diagram for an Object Placed at 2f The image that forms will have the following properties: The image forms... at 2 f The nature of the image is... real The orientation of the image is... inverted The size of the image is... the same For an object placed at a distance between 1 and 2 focal lengths A Converging Lens Ray Diagram for an Object Placed Between f and 2f The image that forms will have the following properties: The image forms... beyond 2 f The nature of the image is... real The orientation of the image is... inverted The size of the image is... magnified Drawing ray diagrams of virtual images For an object placed at a distance less than the focal length (i.e. a magnifying glass ): A Converging Lens Ray Diagram for an Object Placed Less than f The image that forms will have the following properties: The image forms... at 2 f (on the same side as the object) The nature of the image is... virtual The orientation of the image is... upright The size of the image is... magnified Worked Example Draw a ray diagram to show how a converging lens can be used to form a diminished image of a real object. Label the object, image and principal foci of the lens on your diagram. Answer: Step 1: Start by drawing and labelling a principal axis and the lens as a line or a very thin ellipse Step 2: Mark and label the focal points on each side of the lens Step 3: Draw and label the object at a distance greater than the focal length on the left side of the lens Tip: For a diminished image the object should be placed a distance of at least 2F away from the lens Step 4: Draw a ray through the optical centre of the lens Step 5: Draw a second ray from the object to the lens which is parallel to the principal axis Step 6: Draw the continuation of the ray passing through the focal point on the right side of the lens Step 7: Draw and label the image at the point where the rays meet Step 8: Check your final image and make sure everything is included to gain the marks For a three-mark question, examiners will be looking for: One ray drawn through the optical centre of the lens A second ray drawn which produces a diminished (smaller) image (which must pass through a labelled focal point) Both the object and the image must be drawn and labelled correctly Diverging Lenses In a diverging lens, parallel rays of light are made to diverge (spread out) from the principal focus on the principal axis This lens is sometimes referred to as a concave lens Ray diagram for a diverging lens Parallel rays from a diverging lens appear to come from the principal focus Just like for converging lenses, the distance from the centre of the lens to the focal point is called the focal length , f This length also depends on how curved , or how thick , the lens is The more curved ( thicker ) the lens, the shorter the focal length The shorter the focal length, the more powerful the lens However, f is negative for a diverging lens because it is behind the lens Image Formation by a Diverging Lens No matter the position of the object, all images formed by diverging lenses have the following properties: Nature: Virtual (and not real) Orientation: Upright (the same as the object) Size: Diminished (smaller than the object) Position: On the same side of the lens as the object For an object placed at any distance away from the lens (further than the focal point or closer than): The ray of light incident on the centre of the lens does not change direction The rays of light parallel to the principal axis are refracted It appears that they come from a virtual focus Virtual image produced by a diverging lens for an object beyond f A diverging lens always produces a virtual image, no matter the position of the object in relation to the focal point or the lens. Here, the object is further away from the lens than the focal point. Virtual image produced by a diverging lens for an object closer than f A diverging lens always produces a virtual image, no matter the position of the object in relation to the focal point or the lens. Here, the object is closer to the lens than the focal point. Constructing Ray Diagrams for Diverging Lenses Follow the steps below to produce a ray diagram for a diverging lens: Virtual image produced by a diverging lens The step-by-step procedure for drawing accurate diverging lens ray diagrams Start by drawing a ray going from the top of the object through the centre of the lens. This ray will continue to travel in a straight line Next, draw a ray going from the top of the object, travelling parallel to the axis to the lens. When this ray emerges from the lens, it will move in a line as if coming from the focal point Draw a dashed line continuing this ray downwards to the focal point, f The image is the line drawn from the axis to the point where the above two rays meet Worked Example Draw a ray diagram to show how an image is formed of an object placed at the focal point of a diverging lens. Label the object, image and principal focus of the lens on your diagram. Answer: Step 1: Start by drawing and labelling a principal axis and the lens as a line Step 2: Mark and label the principal focus and the object in the same place on one side of the lens Step 3: Draw a ray from the top of the object through the centre of the lens Step 4: Draw a ray from the top of the object travelling parallel to the axis of the lens Step 5: Draw the continuation of the ray diverging away from the principal focus Step 6: Draw a dashed line continuing this ray downwards to the principal focus Step 7: Draw an arrow up from the principal axis to the point where the two rays meet and label it image Examiner Tips and Tricks When drawing ray diagrams, convex (converging) and concave (diverging) lenses can be simplified using the following symbols:
Converging Lenses A lens is a piece of equipment that forms an image by refracting light There are two types of lenses: A convex, or converging lens A concave, or diverging lens In a converging lens, parallel rays of light are brought to a focus along the principal axis This point is called the focal point The Ray Diagram of a Converging Lens A converging lens brings parallel rays of light to a focus The distance from the centre of the lens to the focal point is called the focal length , f This length depends on how curved , or how thick , the lens is The more curved ( thicker ) the lens, the shorter the focal length The shorter the focal length, the more powerful the lens f is positive for a converging lens because it is in front of the lens The Different Shapes of Lenses with Long and Short Focal Lengths The focal length is shorter in a lens that is thicker and more curved. This makes for a more powerful lens Real & Virtual Images Images produced by lenses can be either real or virtual Real image Virtual image light converges towards a focal point light diverges away from a focal point always inverted always upright can be projected onto a screen cannot be projected onto a screen intersection of two solid lines intersection of two dashed lines (or a dashed and a solid line) example: image from a projector onto a screen example: image in a mirror Constructing Ray Diagrams When constructing ray diagrams of refractors, it is generally assumed that the lenses used are very thin This simplifies the situation by reducing the amount the incident rays of light refract As a result, the three main rules for constructing ray diagrams are as follows: 1. Rays passing through the principal axis will pass through the optical centre of the lens undeviated Converging Lens Ray Diagram Construction Rule 1 2. Rays that are parallel to the principal axis will be refracted and pass through the focal point f Converging Lens Ray Diagram Construction Rule 2 3. Rays passing through the focal point f will emerge parallel to the principal axis Converging Lens Ray Diagram Construction Rule 3 Image Formation by a Converging Lens Images formed by lenses can be described by their Nature: Real or virtual Orientation: Inverted or upright (compared to the object) Size: Magnified (larger), diminished (smaller), or the same size (compared to the object) Drawing ray diagrams of real images For an object placed at a distance greater than 2 focal lengths... A Converging Lens Ray Diagram for an Object Placed Further than 2f The image that forms will have the following properties: The image forms... between f and 2 f The nature of the image is... real The orientation of the image is... inverted The size of the image is... diminished For an object placed at a distance equal to 2 focal lengths... A Converging Lens Ray Diagram for an Object Placed at 2f The image that forms will have the following properties: The image forms... at 2 f The nature of the image is... real The orientation of the image is... inverted The size of the image is... the same For an object placed at a distance between 1 and 2 focal lengths A Converging Lens Ray Diagram for an Object Placed Between f and 2f The image that forms will have the following properties: The image forms... beyond 2 f The nature of the image is... real The orientation of the image is... inverted The size of the image is... magnified Drawing ray diagrams of virtual images For an object placed at a distance less than the focal length (i.e. a magnifying glass ): A Converging Lens Ray Diagram for an Object Placed Less than f The image that forms will have the following properties: The image forms... at 2 f (on the same side as the object) The nature of the image is... virtual The orientation of the image is... upright The size of the image is... magnified
Converging Lenses
A lens is a piece of equipment that forms an image by refracting light
There are two types of lenses: A convex, or converging lens A concave, or diverging lens
There are two types of lenses:
A convex, or converging lens
A concave, or diverging lens
In a converging lens, parallel rays of light are brought to a focus along the principal axis This point is called the focal point
In a converging lens, parallel rays of light are brought to a focus along the principal axis
principal axis
This point is called the focal point
focal point
The Ray Diagram of a Converging Lens
A converging lens brings parallel rays of light to a focus
The distance from the centre of the lens to the focal point is called the focal length , f This length depends on how curved , or how thick , the lens is The more curved ( thicker ) the lens, the shorter the focal length The shorter the focal length, the more powerful the lens f is positive for a converging lens because it is in front of the lens
The distance from the centre of the lens to the focal point is called the focal length , f
This length depends on how curved , or how thick , the lens is
The more curved ( thicker ) the lens, the shorter the focal length
The shorter the focal length, the more powerful the lens
f is positive for a converging lens because it is in front of the lens
The Different Shapes of Lenses with Long and Short Focal Lengths
The focal length is shorter in a lens that is thicker and more curved. This makes for a more powerful lens
Real & Virtual Images
Images produced by lenses can be either real or virtual
Real image Virtual image light converges towards a focal point light diverges away from a focal point always inverted always upright can be projected onto a screen cannot be projected onto a screen intersection of two solid lines intersection of two dashed lines (or a dashed and a solid line) example: image from a projector onto a screen example: image in a mirror
Real image
Virtual image
light converges towards a focal point
light diverges away from a focal point
always inverted
always upright
can be projected onto a screen
cannot be projected onto a screen
intersection of two solid lines
intersection of two dashed lines (or a dashed and a solid line)
example: image from a projector onto a screen
example: image in a mirror
Constructing Ray Diagrams
When constructing ray diagrams of refractors, it is generally assumed that the lenses used are very thin This simplifies the situation by reducing the amount the incident rays of light refract
When constructing ray diagrams of refractors, it is generally assumed that the lenses used are very thin
This simplifies the situation by reducing the amount the incident rays of light refract
As a result, the three main rules for constructing ray diagrams are as follows:
1. Rays passing through the principal axis will pass through the optical centre of the lens undeviated
Converging Lens Ray Diagram Construction Rule 1
2. Rays that are parallel to the principal axis will be refracted and pass through the focal point f
Converging Lens Ray Diagram Construction Rule 2
3. Rays passing through the focal point f will emerge parallel to the principal axis
Converging Lens Ray Diagram Construction Rule 3
Image Formation by a Converging Lens
Images formed by lenses can be described by their Nature: Real or virtual Orientation: Inverted or upright (compared to the object) Size: Magnified (larger), diminished (smaller), or the same size (compared to the object)
Images formed by lenses can be described by their
Nature: Real or virtual
Orientation: Inverted or upright (compared to the object)
Size: Magnified (larger), diminished (smaller), or the same size (compared to the object)
Drawing ray diagrams of real images
For an object placed at a distance greater than 2 focal lengths...
A Converging Lens Ray Diagram for an Object Placed Further than 2f
The image that forms will have the following properties:
The image forms... between f and 2 f The nature of the image is... real The orientation of the image is... inverted The size of the image is... diminished
The image forms...
between f and 2 f
The nature of the image is...
real
The orientation of the image is...
inverted
The size of the image is...
diminished
For an object placed at a distance equal to 2 focal lengths...
A Converging Lens Ray Diagram for an Object Placed at 2f
The image forms... at 2 f The nature of the image is... real The orientation of the image is... inverted The size of the image is... the same
at 2 f
the same
For an object placed at a distance between 1 and 2 focal lengths
A Converging Lens Ray Diagram for an Object Placed Between f and 2f
The image forms... beyond 2 f The nature of the image is... real The orientation of the image is... inverted The size of the image is... magnified
beyond 2 f
magnified
Drawing ray diagrams of virtual images
For an object placed at a distance less than the focal length (i.e. a magnifying glass ):
A Converging Lens Ray Diagram for an Object Placed Less than f
The image forms... at 2 f (on the same side as the object) The nature of the image is... virtual The orientation of the image is... upright The size of the image is... magnified
at 2 f (on the same side as the object)
virtual
upright
Worked Example Draw a ray diagram to show how a converging lens can be used to form a diminished image of a real object. Label the object, image and principal foci of the lens on your diagram. Answer: Step 1: Start by drawing and labelling a principal axis and the lens as a line or a very thin ellipse Step 2: Mark and label the focal points on each side of the lens Step 3: Draw and label the object at a distance greater than the focal length on the left side of the lens Tip: For a diminished image the object should be placed a distance of at least 2F away from the lens Step 4: Draw a ray through the optical centre of the lens Step 5: Draw a second ray from the object to the lens which is parallel to the principal axis Step 6: Draw the continuation of the ray passing through the focal point on the right side of the lens Step 7: Draw and label the image at the point where the rays meet Step 8: Check your final image and make sure everything is included to gain the marks For a three-mark question, examiners will be looking for: One ray drawn through the optical centre of the lens A second ray drawn which produces a diminished (smaller) image (which must pass through a labelled focal point) Both the object and the image must be drawn and labelled correctly
Worked Example
Draw a ray diagram to show how a converging lens can be used to form a diminished image of a real object.
Label the object, image and principal foci of the lens on your diagram.
Answer:
Step 1: Start by drawing and labelling a principal axis and the lens as a line or a very thin ellipse
Step 2: Mark and label the focal points on each side of the lens
Step 3: Draw and label the object at a distance greater than the focal length on the left side of the lens
Tip: For a diminished image the object should be placed a distance of at least 2F away from the lens
Step 4: Draw a ray through the optical centre of the lens
Step 5: Draw a second ray from the object to the lens which is parallel to the principal axis
Step 6: Draw the continuation of the ray passing through the focal point on the right side of the lens
Step 7: Draw and label the image at the point where the rays meet
Step 8: Check your final image and make sure everything is included to gain the marks
For a three-mark question, examiners will be looking for: One ray drawn through the optical centre of the lens A second ray drawn which produces a diminished (smaller) image (which must pass through a labelled focal point) Both the object and the image must be drawn and labelled correctly
For a three-mark question, examiners will be looking for:
One ray drawn through the optical centre of the lens
A second ray drawn which produces a diminished (smaller) image (which must pass through a labelled focal point)
Both the object and the image must be drawn and labelled correctly
Diverging Lenses In a diverging lens, parallel rays of light are made to diverge (spread out) from the principal focus on the principal axis This lens is sometimes referred to as a concave lens Ray diagram for a diverging lens Parallel rays from a diverging lens appear to come from the principal focus Just like for converging lenses, the distance from the centre of the lens to the focal point is called the focal length , f This length also depends on how curved , or how thick , the lens is The more curved ( thicker ) the lens, the shorter the focal length The shorter the focal length, the more powerful the lens However, f is negative for a diverging lens because it is behind the lens Image Formation by a Diverging Lens No matter the position of the object, all images formed by diverging lenses have the following properties: Nature: Virtual (and not real) Orientation: Upright (the same as the object) Size: Diminished (smaller than the object) Position: On the same side of the lens as the object For an object placed at any distance away from the lens (further than the focal point or closer than): The ray of light incident on the centre of the lens does not change direction The rays of light parallel to the principal axis are refracted It appears that they come from a virtual focus Virtual image produced by a diverging lens for an object beyond f A diverging lens always produces a virtual image, no matter the position of the object in relation to the focal point or the lens. Here, the object is further away from the lens than the focal point. Virtual image produced by a diverging lens for an object closer than f A diverging lens always produces a virtual image, no matter the position of the object in relation to the focal point or the lens. Here, the object is closer to the lens than the focal point. Constructing Ray Diagrams for Diverging Lenses Follow the steps below to produce a ray diagram for a diverging lens: Virtual image produced by a diverging lens The step-by-step procedure for drawing accurate diverging lens ray diagrams Start by drawing a ray going from the top of the object through the centre of the lens. This ray will continue to travel in a straight line Next, draw a ray going from the top of the object, travelling parallel to the axis to the lens. When this ray emerges from the lens, it will move in a line as if coming from the focal point Draw a dashed line continuing this ray downwards to the focal point, f The image is the line drawn from the axis to the point where the above two rays meet
Diverging Lenses
In a diverging lens, parallel rays of light are made to diverge (spread out) from the principal focus on the principal axis This lens is sometimes referred to as a concave lens
In a diverging lens, parallel rays of light are made to diverge (spread out) from the principal focus on the principal axis
This lens is sometimes referred to as a concave lens
Ray diagram for a diverging lens
Parallel rays from a diverging lens appear to come from the principal focus
Just like for converging lenses, the distance from the centre of the lens to the focal point is called the focal length , f This length also depends on how curved , or how thick , the lens is The more curved ( thicker ) the lens, the shorter the focal length The shorter the focal length, the more powerful the lens However, f is negative for a diverging lens because it is behind the lens
Just like for converging lenses, the distance from the centre of the lens to the focal point is called the focal length , f
This length also depends on how curved , or how thick , the lens is
However, f is negative for a diverging lens because it is behind the lens
Image Formation by a Diverging Lens
No matter the position of the object, all images formed by diverging lenses have the following properties: Nature: Virtual (and not real) Orientation: Upright (the same as the object) Size: Diminished (smaller than the object) Position: On the same side of the lens as the object
No matter the position of the object, all images formed by diverging lenses have the following properties:
Nature: Virtual (and not real)
Orientation: Upright (the same as the object)
Size: Diminished (smaller than the object)
Position: On the same side of the lens as the object
For an object placed at any distance away from the lens (further than the focal point or closer than): The ray of light incident on the centre of the lens does not change direction The rays of light parallel to the principal axis are refracted It appears that they come from a virtual focus
For an object placed at any distance away from the lens (further than the focal point or closer than):
The ray of light incident on the centre of the lens does not change direction
The rays of light parallel to the principal axis are refracted It appears that they come from a virtual focus
The rays of light parallel to the principal axis are refracted
It appears that they come from a virtual focus
Virtual image produced by a diverging lens for an object beyond f
A diverging lens always produces a virtual image, no matter the position of the object in relation to the focal point or the lens. Here, the object is further away from the lens than the focal point.
Virtual image produced by a diverging lens for an object closer than f
A diverging lens always produces a virtual image, no matter the position of the object in relation to the focal point or the lens. Here, the object is closer to the lens than the focal point.
Constructing Ray Diagrams for Diverging Lenses
Follow the steps below to produce a ray diagram for a diverging lens:
Virtual image produced by a diverging lens
The step-by-step procedure for drawing accurate diverging lens ray diagrams
Start by drawing a ray going from the top of the object through the centre of the lens. This ray will continue to travel in a straight line
Next, draw a ray going from the top of the object, travelling parallel to the axis to the lens. When this ray emerges from the lens, it will move in a line as if coming from the focal point
Draw a dashed line continuing this ray downwards to the focal point, f
The image is the line drawn from the axis to the point where the above two rays meet
Worked Example Draw a ray diagram to show how an image is formed of an object placed at the focal point of a diverging lens. Label the object, image and principal focus of the lens on your diagram. Answer: Step 1: Start by drawing and labelling a principal axis and the lens as a line Step 2: Mark and label the principal focus and the object in the same place on one side of the lens Step 3: Draw a ray from the top of the object through the centre of the lens Step 4: Draw a ray from the top of the object travelling parallel to the axis of the lens Step 5: Draw the continuation of the ray diverging away from the principal focus Step 6: Draw a dashed line continuing this ray downwards to the principal focus Step 7: Draw an arrow up from the principal axis to the point where the two rays meet and label it image
Draw a ray diagram to show how an image is formed of an object placed at the focal point of a diverging lens.
Label the object, image and principal focus of the lens on your diagram.
Step 1: Start by drawing and labelling a principal axis and the lens as a line
Step 2: Mark and label the principal focus and the object in the same place on one side of the lens
Step 3: Draw a ray from the top of the object through the centre of the lens
Step 4: Draw a ray from the top of the object travelling parallel to the axis of the lens
Step 5: Draw the continuation of the ray diverging away from the principal focus
Step 6: Draw a dashed line continuing this ray downwards to the principal focus
Step 7: Draw an arrow up from the principal axis to the point where the two rays meet and label it image
Examiner Tips and Tricks When drawing ray diagrams, convex (converging) and concave (diverging) lenses can be simplified using the following symbols:
Examiner Tips and Tricks
When drawing ray diagrams, convex (converging) and concave (diverging) lenses can be simplified using the following symbols:
